---
title: "C3 0.7.2 - Quality Of Life"
date: 2025-06-02
author: "Christoffer Lernö"
---

Unlike 0.7.1, 0.7.2 is not about big new features, instead it is laser focused on adding quality of life improvements, which are [backwards compatible](/getting-started/roadmap/#c3-is-feature-stable) with other 0.7 releases. 


## Compile time additions

:::note[Note on compile time]
C3 has visual differentiation between *compile time* and *runtime code*, to make it explicit *when* the code will be run. 

Compile time code uses `$if condition:` ... `$endif` for conditional logic.
Learn more about [macros](/generic-programming/macros/) and [compile time evaluation](/generic-programming/compiletime/).
:::


#### Simplifying compile time evaluated code

Setting a variable at compile time can now be simplified using compile time logical or `|||` 
and compile time logical and `&&&` with a variable right hand expression.

The original code to set a variable at compile time:

```c3
$if FOO:
    bool x = true;
$else
    bool x = foo();
$endif
```
    
Now this compile time variable can be set with compile time logical or `|||` compactly as:

```c3
bool x = FOO ||| foo();
```
    
You can also use compile time logical and `&&&` in a similar way.

#### Compile time random: `@rnd`

Sometimes it can be useful to create unique ids at compile time. This is now possible with the `@rnd` macro.

#### Compile time ceil: `math::@ceil`

It is somewhat hard to write a good compile time `ceil` function, so 0.7.2 adds a builtin which is accessible using the `math::@ceil` macro.

## General additions

#### Set the run directory

To make `c3c run` and `c3c compile-run` more convenient, it's now possible to use `--run-dir` (or the project setting `run-dir`) to set the director from which the compiler runs the resulting binary.

#### Limits to SIMD sizes

Limitations of vectors are sometimes misunderstood, they will cause code bloat if used for large vectors. For this reason a max vector size has been introduced. By default this is 4096 bits, so basically the size of `double[<64>]`. It is possible to increase this using `--max-vector-size` as needed. (As a comparison, the biggest SIMD vectors on x64 is 512 bits, so such a 4096 bit vector would be represented by 8 registers).

#### `has_tagof` works on builtin types

While `has_tagof` will always return false on builtin types, this change nonetheless simplifies writing compile time code involving tags.

#### Allow recursive generic modules

To simplify generic module resolution it was not possible to recursively generate generic module. This restriction has been lifted in 0.7.1.


## Deprecations

#### Bitsize suffix deprecations

The bitsize suffixes are deprecated, so rather than writing `23u64` use the C style `23UL` instead. `u128` and `i128` suffixes are replaced by `ULL` and `LL` suffixes.

Finally, the `d` suffix for doubles have been added as a complement to `f`.

#### Compile time reflection deprecations

`MyEnum.elements` have been deprecated. Use `MyEnum.len` instead.
`SomeFn.params` have been deprecated. Use `SomeFn.paramsof` instead.

#### Deprecation for old `@param` docs

By 0.7.1 the declaration style `@param foo "abc"` would be allowed rather than `@param foo : "abc"`. This was by accident. It's now properly deprecated.

#### Generic faults are not allowed

Creating faults that are parameterized is usually a mistake and should not have been allowed. It's been completely removed in 0.7.2 as it was classified as a bug.

This is no longer allowed:

```c3
module Foo {Type};
typedef BAZ, HELLO;
```

Faults should be defined in a non-generic module, such as a parent module or sub-module instead.

## Fixes

This release contains about 30 different fixes, most of them newly discovered and not regressions.

They range from fixes to advanced generic types to stdlib bugs.

## Stdlib updates

Currently a new version of the [matrix library](https://github.com/m0tholith/c3math) is incubating, and while it didn't make it for the 0.7.2 release, I hope it can be included by 0.7.4 and contributions are welcome!

#### Optimized `String` -> `ZString` conversions

:::note[Note On Strings]
Default C3 string: `typedef String = inline char[];`  
C compatible, null terminated: `typedef ZString = inline char*;`

Learn more about [strings](/language-common/strings/).
:::

Sometimes a `String` is already pointing to a valid `ZString`, so no copy is needed. To check this, `String` gets two new methods `.is_zstr` to check if the `String` is also zero terminated, and `.quick_zstr` which will create a temp `ZString` if needed, but otherwise use the `String`.

#### `std::ascii` moves into `std::core`

`std::ascii` moved into `std::core::ascii`. Old _m variants are deprecated, as is uint methods.

#### Better String tokenization

It's now possible to further customize tokenization, to ignore empty elements in the middle (or not), ignore any last empty elements at the end (or not). This introduces `.tokenize_all` which replaces the now deprecated `.splitter` method.

#### Count and replace

String further gets some conveniences: `.count` to count the number of instances of a string within the string and `replace` / `treplace` to return a new String with a substring replaced. This functionality was already in DString, but was now added to String as well.

#### Operator overloads for std::time and Maybe

`Duration * Int`, `Clock - Clock` and `DateTime + Duration` overloads were added for manipulating time.

For `Maybe`, the `==` operator is available when the inner type is equatable.

#### Subprocess improvements

Subprocess added an `inherit_stdio` option to inherit the parent's stdin, stdout, and stderr instead of creating pipes.

### Change Log
<details>
	<summary class="
		text-black 
		dark:text-white
		font-medium
		text-lg
		"
	>
		Click for full change log
	</summary>
	
#### Changes / improvements
- Better default assert messages when no message is specified #2122
- Add `--run-dir`, to specify directory for running executable using `compile-run` and `run` #2121.
- Add `run-dir` to project.json.
- Add `quiet` to project.json.
- Deprecate uXX and iXX bit suffixes.
- Add experimental LL / ULL suffixes for int128 and uint128 literals.
- Allow the right hand side of `|||` and `&&&` be runtime values.
- Added `@rnd()` compile time random function (using the `$$rnd()` builtin). #2078
- Add `math::@ceil()` compile time ceil function. #2134
- Improve error message when using keywords as functions/macros/variables #2133.
- Deprecate `MyEnum.elements`.
- Deprecate `SomeFn.params`.
- Improve error message when encountering recursively defined structs. #2146
- Limit vector max size, default is 4096 bits, but may be increased using --max-vector-size.
- Allow the use of `has_tagof` on builtin types.
- `@jump` now included in `--list-attributes` #2155.
- Add `$$matrix_mul` and `$$matrix_transpose` builtins.
- Add `d` as floating point suffix for `double` types.
- Deprecate `f32`, `f64` and `f128` suffixes.
- Allow recursive generic modules.
- Add deprecation for `@param foo "abc"`.
- Add `--header-output` and `header-output` options for controlling header output folder.
- Generic faults is disallowed.

#### Fixes
- Assert triggered when casting from `int[2]` to `uint[2]` #2115
- Assert when a macro with compile time value is discarded, e.g. `foo();` where `foo()` returns an untyped list. #2117
- Fix stringify for compound initializers #2120.
- Fix No index OOB check for `[:^n]` #2123.
- Fix regression in Time diff due to operator overloading #2124.
- attrdef with any invalid name causes compiler assert #2128.
- Correctly error on `@attrdef Foo = ;`.
- Contract on trying to use Object without initializing it.
- Variable aliases of aliases would not resolve correctly. #2131
- Variable aliases could not be assigned to.
- Some folding was missing in binary op compile time resolution #2135.
- Defining an enum like `ABC = { 1 2 }` was accidentally allowed.
- Using a non-const as the end range for a bitstruct would trigger an assert.
- Incorrect parsing of ad hoc generic types, like `Foo{int}****` #2140.
- $define did not correctly handle generic types #2140.
- Incorrect parsing of call attributes #2144.
- Error when using named argument on trailing macro body expansion #2139.
- Designated const initializers with `{}` would overwrite the parent field.
- Empty default case in @jump switch does not fallthrough #2147.
- `&&&` was accidentally available as a valid prefix operator.
- Missing error on default values for body with default arguments #2148.
- `--path` does not interact correctly with relative path arguments #2149.
- Add missing `@noreturn` to `os::exit`.
- Implicit casting from struct to interface failure for inheriting interfaces #2151.
- Distinct types could not be used with tagof #2152.
- `$$sat_mul` was missing.
- `for` with incorrect `var` declaration caused crash #2154.
- Check pointer/slice/etc on `[out]` and `&` params. #2156.
- Compiler didn't check foreach over flexible array member, and folding a flexible array member was allowed #2164.
- Too strict project view #2163.
- Bug using `#foo` arguments with `$defined` #2173
- Incorrect ensure on String.split.
- Removed the naive check for compile time modification, which fixes #1997 but regresses in detection.

#### Stdlib changes
- Added `String.quick_ztr` and `String.is_zstr`
- std::ascii moved into std::core::ascii. Old _m variants are deprecated, as is uint methods.
- Add `String.tokenize_all` to replace the now deprecated `String.splitter`
- Add `String.count` to count the number of instances of a string.
- Add `String.replace` and `String.treplace` to replace substrings within a string.
- Add `Duration * Int` and `Clock - Clock` overload.
- Add `DateTime + Duration` overloads.
- Add `Maybe.equals` and respective `==` operator when the inner type is equatable.
- Add `inherit_stdio` option to `SubProcessOptions` to inherit parent's stdin, stdout, and stderr instead of creating pipes. #2012
- Remove superfluous `cleanup` parameter in `os::exit` and `os::fastexit`.
- Add `extern fn ioctl(CInt fd, ulong request, ...)` binding to libc;


</details>

### Want To Dive Into C3?
Check out the [documentation](/getting-started) 
or [download it and try it out](/getting-started/prebuilt-binaries)

Have questions? Come and chat to us on [Discord](https://discord.gg/qN76R87).