---
title: "C3 0.7.0 - One Step Closer To 1.0"
date: 2025-03-30
author: "Christoffer Lernö"
---

## The 0.7.0 milestone reached

Originally I was going to write this as normal release notes, but it's a bit too much to go through
the whys and wherefores of the changes. So the format of this blog post is going to be a bit different.

0.6.0 was tagged in June 2024, and since then there's been monthly releases up until the last one, 0.6.8. 
While the language has evolved during this year, each 0.6.x version has been [backwards compatible](/getting-started/roadmap/) with code written for previous 0.6 versions. Despite this constraint, there have been a lot of improvements, 
especially in enhancing compile time to have much fewer corners, and of course the standard library has 
been improved as well.

Well worth mentioning is the impact [Tsoding](https://www.twitch.tv/tsoding) had on the visibility of the 
language. His "recreational programming" streams on C3 brought a lot of new users to the community, and 
with it a lot of extremely valuable feedback on both the langage and the standard library.

The release format of C3 allows for breaking changes in every new 0.x release. This means that 0.7.0 and
0.6.8 code will not be compatible. Some of this is already deprecated code in 0.6.8, but for some things there 
were no clear migration path.

For that reason, I'd like to start by giving an primer on how to convert 0.6.x code to 0.7.0

## Migrating to 0.7.0

While these changes may *seem* like a lot, most of the changes were actually gradually introduced in 0.6.x with the now removed variants are being deprecated.

### Syntax changes

1. Generics now use `{}` rather than `(<>)`. E.g. `List(<int>) x;` -> `List {int} x;`
2. The keyword `def` has been replaced by `alias`, syntax is otherwise unchanged. E.g. `def Foo = int;` -> `alias Foo = int;`
3. The keyword `distinct` has been replaced by `typedef`, syntax is otherwise unchanged. E.g. `distinct Bar = int;` -> `typedef Bar = int;`
4. Optional types are now declared with `?` instad of `!`. E.g. `int! a;` -> `int? a;`
5. Declare faults with `faultdef`: `fault MyFault { ABC, FOO_FAULT }` -> `faultdef ABC, FOO_FAULT;`
6. The `anyfault` type is now called `fault`. E.g. `anyfault the_err = @catch(foo);` -> `fault the_err = @catch(foo);`
7. Compound literal syntax `Foo { 1, 2 }` is no longer valid. Use C-style `(Foo) { 1, 2 }` instead.
8. `{| |}` expression blocks have been removed. Use `do { ... };` with `break` instead.
9. `&ref` and `$varef` have been removed. Use `#expr` and `$vaexpr` instead.
10. `$vaarg(1)` syntax is now invalid. Use `$vaarg[1]` instead.
11. Casting an enum to its ordinal is no longer valid. `.ordinal` instead.
12. `$or`, `$and` are removed. Use `|||` and `&&&`.
13. `$concat` is removed. Use `+++` instead.
14. `.allocator = allocator` syntax for named arguments in calls is removed. Use the new syntax `allocator: allocator` instead.
15. The "any-switch" has been removed. Switch on `foo.type` then explicitly do the cast instead.
16. `if (catch foo) { case ... }` syntax is removed. Use `if (catch err = foo) { switch (err) { ... } }` instead.
17. `$foreach`, `$for` and `$switch` no longer uses `()`. Remove the parentheses and end the statement with `:`, e.g. `$foreach ($x, $y : $foo)` -> `$foreach $x, $y : $foo:`
18. Remove the `int[?]` syntax which was tested as an alternative to `int[*]`.
19. `@return!` in contracts are changed to `@return?`
20. Contracts that have a trailing description, now MUST have a `:` before the description. E.g. `@require a > b "a must be greater than b"` -> `@require a > b : "a must be greater than b"`.
21. Order of attribute declaration is changed for `alias`: `def Foo = int @public;` -> `alias Foo @public = int;`
22. Definition of new attributes use `attrdef` as the keyword rather than `def`.

### Stdlib changes

1. Use `tmem` rather than `allocator::temp()`.
2. Use `mem` rather than `allocator::heap()`.
3. The `new_init` and other `new_*` functions have been removed. Use `init(mem)`, `s.concat(mem, s2)` etc.
4. The temp allocator is not implicitly set up on other than the main thread. Use `@pool_init()` to set up a temporary memory pool on a thread.
5. Lists and maps no longer allocate on the heap when not initialized. Instead, they use the temp allocator if not initialized.
6. `@pool()` no longer requires (or permits) an allocator. The temp allocator supports any number on in-flight temp allocators.

Overall, the `new` functions, which implicitly used the heap allocator, has gone away and been replaced
by a function that explicitly takes the allocator. There are often also temp allocator variants, which 
are then prefixed with `t`, e.g. `tconcat`.

Try to use the temp allocator when possible.

## Additions and improvements

There are not only removals and changes, there are also some language additions and improvements 
in 0.7.0 compared to 0.6.8.

1. Swizzling assignment is now possible, e.g. `foo.xy += { 1, 2 }` 
2. A `@format` attribute has been added to compile time check formatting strings. 
3. Enum associated values can reference the calling enum.
4. `!!foo` used to not work, now it properly is interpreted as `!(!foo)`.
5. Enum inline values were already in 0.6.8, but from 0.7.0 the `.ordinal` has the same behaviour as associated values. This makes enums more flexible and closer to C enum behaviour.
6. `@wstring`, `@wstring32`, `@char32` and `@char16` macros were added for interfacing with wide character libraries.

## Thoughts on 0.7.0

The breaking changes of 0.7.0 are of two categories: (1) removals (2) syntax changes.

### Why remove things?

One might ask why one would remove things from a language? Surely more is better?

The reason is that learning a language this "one more feature", is additional effort to learn the language. It's 
also one more thing for people knowing the language to remember. In this way, each feature has a cost
outside of compiler complexity.

When people encounter a rare feature such as the any-switch, they will need to look up how it works. This both
takes time and undermines people's confidence that they know the language.

So during the development of a language it's important to weed out things that aren't carrying its weight, and this
is why 0.7 removes features.

### Why change syntax?

As an example, `int! a;` has been used in C3 since the introduction of optionals. Why change it now?

In this case it's because the semantics of `int! a;` was quite different from an optional when it was introduced.
The use of `!` was exactly *not* to confuse it with an optional. Now it's so much closer to the "common" optional that
a change to `int? a;` makes perfect sense.

`def` -> `alias` follows a similar trajectory. Initially it would be used both for aliases and to _define_ new
attributes and distinct types. Then distinct type definition got its own separate definition, so it was more like
an alias aside from the attributes. With attributes getting its own `attrdef`, what remained were only aliases, and
changing the name to `alias` suddenly made perfect sense.

Both these changes make the language follow *more common* syntax conventions as well, which is a win.

The goal is for the syntax to feel straightforward and have as little "oh this is odd" as possible. This
makes it both easier to learn and remember.

### More like C

Even though neither `alias` nor `int?` exist in C, they're familiar from adjacent languages. I believe
this will make C3 feel "more like C", even though the changes are not in C.

Similarly, removing novel constructs like the expression block reduces the divergence from C syntax.

## C3 0.7.1 and onwards

Where C3 0.7.0 has been a big cleanup release, it doesn't have that many improvements to general quality 
of life aside from the `@format` attribute.

I am really looking forward to inlining and resolving more function contracts on the caller side. In the
first pass it will catch some low hanging fruit such as passing invalid constants, but this can be gradually
improved to catch even more bugs.

Another thing is improving the standard library. There are additions I'd like to do both to the collections
and to threads.

There are also a number of minor improvements to the compiler that would add to the quality of life for
some uses. On top of this the inline asm is in need of bug fixes and cleanup.

Outside of the language and the compiler, a good docgen is needed.

But as for language changes, there is nothing planned, just incremental improvements to what's already 
there.


## Change Log

Here is the full changelist for 0.6.8 to 0.7.0. Obviously if we'd bundle all changes from 0.6.1 to 0.7.0 the
list would be MUCH bigger :D

<details>
	<summary class="
		text-black 
		dark:text-white
		font-medium
		text-lg
		"
	>
		Click for full change log
	</summary>
	
- Removed `Foo { 1, 2 }` initializer.
- Changed `Foo(<int>)` to `Foo {int}`.
- Removed `{| |}` expression blocks.
- Removed macro `&ref` and `$varef` parameters.
- Removed `$vaexpr(0)` syntax in favour of `$vaexpr[0]`
- Enum does not cast to/from an integer (its ordinal).
- Removed use of `void!` for main, test and benchmark functions.
- Removed `$or`, `$and`, `$concat` compile time functions.
- Removed `@adhoc` attribute.
- Disallow inline use of nested generics (e.g. `List{List{int}}`.
- Remove `.allocator = allocator` syntax for functions.
- Remove `@operator(construct)`.
- Removal of "any-switch".
- Allow swizzling assign, eg. `abc.xz += { 5, 10 };`
- Added `$$wstr16` and `$$wstr32` builtins.
- `$foreach` "()" replaced by trailing ":" `$foreach ($x, $y : $foo)` -> `$foreach $x, $y : $foo:`
- `$for` "()" replaced by trailing ":" `$for (var $x = 0; $x < FOO; $x++)` -> `$for var $x = 0; $x < FOO; $x++:`
- `$switch` "()" replaced by trailing ":" `$switch ($Type)` -> `$switch $Type:`
- Empty `$switch` requires trailing ":" `$switch` -> `$switch:`
- Rename `@return!` to `@return?` and change syntax to require ":" after faults.
- Remove `if (catch foo) { case ... }` syntax.
- Remove `[?]` syntax.
- Change `int!` to `int?` syntax.
- New `fault` declaration using `faultdef`.
- Enum associated values can reference the calling enum.
- Improve error message on `foo ?? io::EOF` with missing '?' #2036
- Make `@public` import recursive. #2018
- Fault nameof prefixes the first last module path, for instance `std::io::EOF` is rendered as `io::EOF`.
- Rename `def` to `alias`.
- Change `distinct` -> `typedef`.
- Order of attribute declaration is changed for `alias`.
- Added `LANGUAGE_DEV_VERSION` env constant.
- Rename `anyfault` -> `fault`.
- `!!foo` now works same as as `! ! foo`.
- Temp allocator now supports more than 2 in-flight stacks.
- Printing stacktrace uses its own temp allocator.
- Allow inferred type on body parameters. E.g. `@stack_mem(1024; alloc) { ... };`
- Use `@pool_init()` to set up a temp pool on a thread. Only the main thread has implicit temp pool setup.
- `tmem` is now a variable.
- Compile test and benchmark functions when invoking `--lsp` #2058.
- Added `@format` attribute for compile time printf validation #2057.
- Formatter no longer implicitly converts enums to ordinals.

### Fixes
- Fix address sanitizer to work on MachO targets (e.g. MacOS).
- Post and pre-decrement operators switched places for vector elements #2010.
- Aliases were incorrectly considered compile time constants.
- FreeBSD libc stat definitions were incorrect.
- Atomic max was incorrect.
- `"+".to_float()` would panic.
- `import` can now both be @public and @norecurse.
- Crash when trying to convert a struct slice to a vector #2039.
- Crash resolving a method on `Foo[2]` when `Foo` is distinct #2042.
- Bug due to missing cast when doing `$i[$x] = $z`.
- Incorrectly allowed getting pointer to a macro #2049.
- &self not runtime null-checked in macro #1827.
- Bug when printing a boolean value as an integer using printf.
- Show error when a generic module contains a self-generic type.
- "Single module" was not enforced when creating a static library using as a project target.

### Stdlib changes
- `new_*` functions in general moved to version without `new_` prefix.
- `string::new_from_*` changed to `string::from_*`.
- `String.to_utf16_copy` and related changed to `String.to_utf16`.
- `String.to_utf16_tcopy` and related changed to `String.to_temp_utf16`
- `mem::temp_new` changed to `mem::tnew`.
- `mem::temp_alloc` and related changed to `mem::talloc`.
- `mem::temp_new_array` changed to `mem::temp_array`.
- Add `ONHEAP` variants for List/HashMap for initializing global maps on the heap.
- Remove Vec2 and other aliases from std::math. Replace `.length_sq()` with `sq_magnitude()`
- Change all hash functions to have a common `hash` function.
- `@wstring`, `@wstring32`, `@char32` and `@char16` compile time macros added.
- Updates to `Atomic` to handle distinct types and booleans.
- Added `math::iota`.
- `@pool` no longer takes an argument.
- `Allocator` interface removes `mark` and `reset`.
- DynamicArenaAllocator has changed init function.
- Added `BackedArenaAllocator` which is allocated to a fixed size, then allocates on the backing allocator and supports mark/reset.
- `AnyList` now also defaults to the temp allocator.
- `os::getcwd` and `os::get_home_dir` requires an explicit allocator.
- `file::load_new` and `file::load_path_new` removed.
- `os::exit` and `os::fastexit` added.

</details>

### Want To Dive Into C3?
Check out the [documentation](/getting-started) 
or [download it and try it out](/getting-started/prebuilt-binaries)

Have questions? Come and chat to us on [Discord](https://discord.gg/qN76R87).