---
title: Builtins
description: Builtins
sidebar:
    order: 226
---
The compiler offers builtin constants and functions. Some are only available on certain targets. All builtins use the `$$`
name prefix.

## Builtin constants

These constants are generated by the compiler and can safely be used by the user.

#### `$$BENCHMARK_NAMES`
An array of names of the benchmark functions.

#### `$$BENCHMARK_FNS`
An array of addresses to the benchmark functions.

#### `$$DATE`
The current date.

#### `$$FILE`
The current file name.

#### `$$FILEPATH`
The current file with path.

#### `$$FUNC`
The current function name, will return "<GLOBAL>" on the global level.

#### `$$FUNCTION`
The current function as an expression.

#### `$$LINE`
The current line as an integer.

#### `$$LINE_RAW`
Usually the same as `$$LINE`, but in case of a macro inclusion it returns the line in the macro rather than
the line where the macro was included.

#### `$$MODULE`
The current module name.

#### `$$TIME`
The current time.


## Compiler builtin functions

The `$$` namespace defines *compiler builtin functions*. 
These special functions are __not guaranteed__ to exist on 
all platforms, and are ways to wrap compiler implemented, optimized implementations
of some particular functionality. They are mainly intended for standard 
library *internal* use. The standard library have macros 
that wrap these builtins, so they should normally not be used on their own. 

#### `$$trap`

Emits a trap instruction. 

#### `$$unreachable`

Inserts an "unreachable" annotation.

#### `$$stacktrace`

Returns the current "callstack" reference if available. OS and compiler dependent.

#### `$$volatile_store`

Takes a variable and a value and stores the value as a volatile store.

#### `$$volatile_load`

Takes a variable and returns the value using a volatile load.

#### `$$memcpy`

Builtin memcpy instruction.

#### `$$memset`

Builtin memset instruction.

#### `$$prefetch`

Prefetch a memory location.

#### `$$sysclock`

Access to the cycle counter register (or similar low latency clock) on supported
architectures (e.g. RDTSC on x86), otherwise `$$sysclock` will yield 0.

#### `$$syscall`

Makes a syscall according to the platform convention on platforms where it is supported.

### Math functions

Functions `$$ceil`, `$$trunc`, `$$sin`, `$$cos`, `$$log`, `$$log2`, `$$log10`, `$$rint`, `$$round`
`$$sqrt`, `$$roundeven`, `$$floor`, `$$sqrt`, `$$pow`, `$$exp`, `$$fma` and `$$fabs`, `$$copysign`,
`$$round`, `$$nearbyint`.

Can be applied to float vectors or numbers. Returns the same type.

Functions `$$min`, `$$abs` and `$$max` can be applied to any integer or float number or vector.

Function $pow_int takes a float or floating vector + an integer and returns
the same type as the first parameter.

Saturated addition, subtraction and left shift for integers and integer vectors:
`$$sat_add`, `$$sat_shl`, `$$sat_sub`.

### Bit functions

#### `$$fshl` and `$$fshr`

Funnel shift left and right, takes either two integers or two integer vectors.

#### `$$ctz`, `$$clz`, `$$bitreverse`, `$$bswap`, `$$popcount`

Bit functions work on an integer or an integer vector.

### Vector functions

`$$reduce_add`, `$$reduce_mul`, `$$reduce_and`, `$$reduce_or`, `$$reduce_xor` work on integer vectors.

`$$reduce_fadd`, `$$reduce_fmul` works on float vectors.

`$$reduce_max`, `$$reduce_min` works on any vector.

`$$reverse` reverses the values in any vector.

`$$shufflevector` rearranges the values of two vectors using a fixed mask into
a resulting vector.

